Open 5e Character Creation (First Draft)

Character Creation
You can make a character with just a blank piece of paper or text file, but the process is much easier if you have a premade blank character sheet that lists everything you need. You can download them from the game's official site, and you can also find other versions all over the internet.

Step One: Communication and Concept
Talk to the Gamemaster about the game she plans to run, then imagine a character you would enjoy playing in that game. Make sure your character fits into the game setting, and try to avoid obnoxious or disruptive characters who make the game less fun for the other players. When in doubt, discuss things with the rest of your group.

Step Two: Class
Class is your character's job within the adventuring group, and it determines most of her strengths and special abilities. She might be a heavily-armored fighter, a fireball-slinging wizard, or a stealthy rogue. Look through the classes and choose one that fits your concept, then write it down.

Any class can contribute to an adventuring party. Some classes work especially well together, and an adventuring party with a wider variety of classes is generally more effective. Parties with many characters of the same class are perfectly fine, but they may find some adventures more challenging.

Step Three: Race
Race is your character's species, such as human or dwarf. It modifies your ability scores and may give you other special abilities as well, such as a dwarf's resistance to poison or an elf's heightened senses. Look through the races and choose one that fits your concept, then write it down.

Some races have sub-races that give additional traits. If your chosen race has sub-races, you also need to choose a sub-race.

Any race can be any class, but some races are slightly better for certain classes. For example, an elf's Dexterity bonus is very helpful for rogues, but not as useful for fighters in heavy armor. However, the difference isn't dramatic and you should feel free to play whatever race and class combination you want.

Step Four: Background
Your character's background gives you additional skills and proficiencies, as well as a minor feature such as a criminal's underworld connections or a noble's social privileges. Look through the backgrounds and choose one that fits your concept, then write it down. You may also want to write down the name of the ability it grants, such as an acolyte's Shelter of the Faithful.

If none of the existing backgrounds fit your concept, feel free to invent your own using the rules for customizing a background.

Step Five: Alignment
Choose the alignment that most closely describes your character's morality and ethics.

Step Six: Starting Ability Scores
The six ability scores are Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma. Mentally prioritize them in order from most important to your character concept to least important, then write your starting ability scores beside them in this order: 15, 14, 13, 12, 10, 8.

All classes have at least one ability score that is very important to them, and you should strongly consider making that score one of your most important abilities. The ability score priorities for various classes are:

Strength: Barbarian, Paladin; also Fighters and Rangers who focus on close combat
Dexterity: Monk, Rogue; also Fighters and Rangers who focus on ranged combat
Intelligence: Wizard
Wisdom: Cleric, Druid
Charisma: Bard, Sorcerer

Dexterity is a useful secondary trait for anyone wearing light armor. Constitution is a useful secondary trait for everyone, but especially barbarians. Wisdom is a useful secondary trait for monks and rangers. Charisma is a useful secondary trait for paladins. 

Once you've determined your starting ability scores, apply any adjustments from species. For example, a high elf increases her Dexterity by 2 and her Intelligence by 1.

You should also calculate and write down the ability modifier for each of your abilities. You can find further instructions in the chapter on ability scores.

Step Seven: Filling Out Your Character Sheet
Now that you've made all the major decisions for your character, it's time to fill out your character sheet.

Record all of your starting class features, including skills, then add any skills you received from your background and species. Most classes have a few extra choices to make, such a fighter's fighting style or a sorcerer's starting spells, but the class descriptions will contain instructions for those.

You should also write down any saving throw proficiencies from class and any unusual proficiencies, such as tool proficiencies gained from being a dwarf or choosing certain backgrounds. You may also write down any languages your character speaks. (All characters can speak Common, but most get additional languages from species and background.)

Step Eight: Equipment
The simplest way to determine your starting equipment is to choose one of the equipment packages from your class, then add any equipment from your background. You can customize your starting equipment by swapping out items for other items of nearly equivalent value. Don't worry about exact costs; a few gold pieces one way or another won't make a big difference.

Alternatively, you can purchase your starting equipment. You start with gold pieces based on your class.

Monks get 12 gp.
Barbarians and druids get 50 gp.
Sorcerers get 75 gp.
Rogues, warlocks, and wizards get 100 gp.
Bards, clerics, fighters, paladins, and rangers get 125 gp.

Step Nine: Finishing Touches
Write down your starting hit points, hit dice, proficiency bonus, Armor Class, speed, passive Perception, and initiative.

Your starting hit points and hit dice are based on your class.

Your proficiency bonus is based on your level, and always starts at +2 at first level.

Your Armor Class is based on your armor, as well as your shield if you carry one, and certain rare class abilities. If you wear light or medium armor, your Dexterity modifier also adjusts your Armor Class. If you wear medium armor, your Dexterity cannot increase your Armor Class more than 2 points. 

Your speed is based on your race. If you wear heavy armor and your Strength is less than the listed minimum recommended Strength value for the armor, subtract 10 from your speed.

Your passive Perception is 10 plus your Wisdom modifier. If you have Perception as a skill proficiency, add you proficiency bonus as well.

Your initiative modifier is equal to your Dexterity modifier.
